From Hansel minutes.com. It's Hanselman.
It's a weekly discussion with
web developer and technologists. Scott
Hanselman hosted by Carl Franklin. This
is Jeff May like announcing show
number 29. Recorded Tuesday, August 15th, 2006.
Support for Hansel minutes is
provided by code Smith tools,
makers of code Smith, an
extensible template based code generator
for.net Hansel minutes. Listeners get
$100 off COVID Smith professional
with coupon code H M
100. online@covidsmithtools.com. Support is also
provided by dotnet developers journal.
The world's leading.net developer magazine
online at www dot
dot com. In this episode,
the topic is dynamic versus
compiled languages. Hi, this is
Carl Franklin and you're listening to
Hansel minutes from Hanselman it's
dot com. I'm here with
Scott Hanselman as I am
every week. Hi Scott, how
are you, sir? Good to
talk to you again and
today we're doing a show
on disruptive technologies. What do
you mean by that? Exactly.
Well, I think that disruptive
technologies that are the ones
that come along every few
years and remind us that
maybe we're doing things a
little more, more and more
hard than we need to
be spending a little bit
more time on things that
aren't as important. I think
that the, that Ruby is
a good example in particularly
Ruby on rails is a
good example of something that's
come along and reminded us
that no development on the
web really doesn't need to
be this complicated. And we
spent a lot of time
as.net developers suffering in the
ASP ASP early, early, early
asp.net years. And you know,
things are coming along that
are disrupting kind of the
way we think, you know,
people are moving away from
complex web applications to, to
simpler patterns. And I think
that a Ruby and Ruby
on rails and the success
of those technologies are worth
exploring, but not just because
it's something interesting. It's not
Microsoft, but because most of
the people, I think that
listen to this show or
Microsoft E's in some way,
Microsoft and.net pay our mortgages,
but that what can we,
as dotnet developers learn from
Ruby and Ruby on rails
to apply to our lives
as.net developers, right? This doesn't
mean we should necessarily jump
ship, but you know, you're
writing code, like just for
example, the code that you
use to manage Hansel minutes
and the shows that, that,
that you work on, right?
It's all written asp.net, right?
You can an administrative console.
Yeah. It's mostly using what
we call crud. Right? Create,
read, update, delete. Sure. There's
a lot of code there.
I mean, how much code
are we talking about for
the Hansel minutes? Admin? No,
not a lot of code.
A couple of thousand lines,
couple hundred lines. Do you
think? Oh, Oh, Couple hundred
lines. Really? Not a lot
of cut at all. Okay.
So you use a lot
of data grids, data binding
things like exactly. Did you
write a lot of story
procedures? Just a few. Yeah.
Did you do any cogeneration?
No. So there's an example
kind of, of a middle,
middle of the road.net application
does some creates reads updates
and deletes. You probably use
a lot of the wizards
you took advantage of as
much as.net as possible. And
you know, being that you
are a trainer on this
kind of stuff, you're not
going to waste your time
writing code that already exists.
Exactly. And for, and for
us, you know, the only
people who have to use
it are in inside, you
know, in house maybe three
or four people and usually
only one at a time.
Sure. So it doesn't need
to necessarily be pretty, but
it's very functional. I mean,
I've used it and I've
worked, I've done administration on
the show. So it's not
that big of a, a,
not a big of a
deal, but it's a good
example of what we call
kind of the 80% example.
It's the adding of information
to assist them, retrieving it,
looking at it, sorting it,
adding details. If you were
going to do something like
an upgrade to it, you'd
probably kind of do it
manually. You change the schema
and then you change the
code and it would be,
would work just fine. Right
now, I'm in the.net world.
When you go file new
web application, you pretty much
get a blank page. You
know, hello world is really
the start. When you go
file new asp.net application in
the Ruby on rails world,
there's you get a little
bit more rails assumes that
you're probably going to be
talking to a database and
it has a thing called
scaffolding. You basically say, I
want to scaffold out a,
an application. And when you
run scaffolding after installing Ruby
and rails, and maybe something
like, like my sequel, you
sit down and you basically
go and say rails space.
And then if I wanted
an application called foo, I'd
say rail space Fu and
I would get a whole
application created for me, an
empty web application that would
run under really any web
server. But, you know, typically
you can run it under
either their, their built in
web server or under something
like Apache and you get
started up. You're basically, you
hit a hello world page
that says, congratulations, you're on
rails. It reminds me of
the visual basic application wizard
or something like that. Right.
It gives you a lot
more, I think, than, than
we're really used to getting.
I think that, Is it
good? Is it good code?
Is it something, is it
typical wizard output or is
it something that actually is
sustainable? Well, so here's the
thing that's so interesting about,
about rails is that they
have a philosophy which they
call a convention over configuration.
We talked about this a
little bit in a previous
show as a philosophy that
we like to apply to.net
code, but they have a
lot of conventions. You know,
they say that, you know,
stuff, stuff goes in the
config folder and we have
a folder called test and
we have a folder called
app and you can't those
right? That's what the folders
name is. Right, right. And
a dot. And this is
a generalization, but in a.net
application, you'd typically have some
app, you know, config file
where you could override that
the name of that directory
is this. Or I, you
know, I want this file
to be over there. They
say, no, we're going to
really focus on convention. Standardized
that stuff. Exactly. One less
thing to worry about. Now,
the, the, the code that
gets generated. What's interesting about
it. Is it? So there's
so nothing there it's incredibly
simple. And what, what really
makes rails work is that
it understands how the software
development process should work. For
example, when you're dealing with
a database, you typically have
a development database, maybe a
test, one for running your
unit test and a production,
one with.net. There's really no
built in way that knows
that this is the case,
right? You typically will have
different connection strings, right? If
a connection string that you
would modify on a web
dot config in rails, they
have a thing called a
database dot YML file. It's
basically like in any file.
And within that, you indicate
different environments. You can say,
well, I'm going to use
the, the, my SQL adapter
during development to talk to
this database on the local
host with this name and
password. But when I go
to test, I'll run over
here. And when I go
to production, I'll be using
this different adapter. So it
actually knows that there are
different modes. It's built that
it's built that in. So
there's just an example where
the, the way that development
is done in software is
built into the application itself.
The whole framework knows that
this is how things happen.
Well, there's plenty of that
stuff in ASP net, I
would argue, Hey, we're an
asp.net other than saying debug
equals false. Do you indicate
that now I am developing.
Now I am testing now.
No, no, no. That's not
what I meant. That's not
what I meant. I meant,
you know, the kind of
nice extra things such as
the ability to just drag
a table from data and
have an editable grid. You
know, that's a nice high
level feature. The connection strings
in the config file, you
know, as a standardized way,
the personalization, I mean, there's
a lot of high level
features in asp.net, especially to
O that you could consider
falling into that same camp
of extra stuff. Okay, let
me, let me rephrase. Then.
That's a good point. But
so there are lots of
things in asp.net that make
development easy, but I think
that there's not necessarily a
whole lot of things that
make the development process easy
migrations. For example, when you
migrate from one version of
an app to another version
of an app, right? Let's
say I build an application,
I make a table with
people and I've got a
first name, column, and a
last name column, and I've
got an object that I'm
going to be storing in
that column within asp.net. I
might create a, a class
person and he has a
first name and last name.
And then I might take
that user and maybe I'll
use something like N hibernate,
but you know, not a
lot of average, Joe developers
use tools like that, that
are object relational mappers. Typically
they'll write the data, access
layer themselves, right? And they'll
take that object apart and
make sure that that object
gets put into the, the
table appropriately. So then the
application changes, I have to
modify the schema, right? So
I'll go into SQL, modify
the schema and then generate
a SQL file that I
have to remember to run
on the production database, to
alter that table and add
a new column. And then
I have to go into
my code and then tell
it that there's this new,
new, middle name field that's
going to be added to
our person table and then
update my data access code
to put that middle name
in there. So it's not
hard. It's just detail oriented.
There's a lot of stuff
there within rails. There's this
notion of migrations where you
make a change and it
keeps track of what is
going to be required to
get you from this state,
like version one to this
date version one.one. Okay. So
all of this is being
handled by a thing called
active record. An active record
would let you do things
like class project. And then
you could say something like
derives from active wrecker and
a project belongs to a
portfolio. And a project has
one project manager, a project
has many milestones. It sounds
like I'm just reading English.
That's kind of what, what
Ruby looks like when you're
using active record, you might
have in the database, the
description of what a project
looks like, and you just
write your class like that.
I mean, the class project
might be five lines, just
exactly. As I described it,
you would literally write down
class project has one project
manager and those relationships then
get managed by this active
record system. And it handles
the persistence of that to,
and from the database because
Ruby is such a dynamic
language, it handles it. So
then if I wanted to
migrate from one version of
my application to another, I
can automatically just generate the
migration by describing what's changed
by making a change in
saying, all right, I'm gonna
go from this version and
that version, and it'll handle
it for you. It also
keeps track of irreversible migrations
when I move forward, but
I can't back up because
one of the other things
that rails allows you to
do is say, I want
to roll back. I just
made a goof. I added
something to my database. I've
changed my application, but it
was a bad idea. I
need to push the easy
button and roll back everything
automatically. So Scott, the question,
next question that comes to
my mind is, are, are
these features that Microsoft, if
they were listening could say,
Hey, that's a good feature.
We'll add that to in
the next ASP net, or
is it more indicative of
the dynamic language nature of
Ruby that these features become
possible? And which is you've,
you've absolutely nailed it right
there. You've asked, you've asked
both the right questions. One
is Microsoft gonna move towards
this. And definitely, I think
that this is a computer
science thing that's happening, not
necessarily a Microsoft thing, everyone's
in this direction where we
are, we've had this schizophrenia,
right? You know, 30 years
ago, you have your, your
small talk folks that have
got this very dynamic world
and then C plus plus,
and C start getting more
static typing C plus plus
starts making decisions about how
inheritance works. C sharp says,
all right, we don't allow
multiple inheritance things get stronger
and stronger typed. So in
the, in the windows world,
we're kind of having the
screws tightened on us. So
over the last 15, 20
years, the screws have been
tightened and the developers are
dealing with it right. To
mix my metaphors. Right. You
know how to boil a
frog, right? Yeah. Oil boils
water and turn up the
heat slowly. Right. So why
do you think that people
are so excited about JavaScript
and Ajax and about PowerShell
because suddenly this, all the
power of.net and all the
freedom of a dynamic language
is kind of coming out.
So I think that yes,
part of it is that
Ruby is such a dynamic
language. But I think that
if you take a look
at C sharp three O
like at shrink stir slash
H E I you're going
to see that Anders in
the field, folks that are
designing C-sharp Theo are adding
this, this dynamicism then Nam,
then dynamism that too. They're
adding that to C-sharp three.
Oh. And they're making that
happen. And it's technologies like
link L I N Q
at shrinker slash H E
H. And that are making
that possible right. Where you
can have all of the
benefits of a compiler, but
also some of that, that
dynamic behavior that you see
in a, in an interpreted
language. And this is a
really interesting question. What is
limiting this technology in the
Microsoft world right now? And
I think it's the fact
that we're a strongly typed
language that underneath VB and
underneath C-sharp there's that aisle.
Right? Right. There's that compiler?
What do we lean on?
What do we count on?
Well, C, C plus plus
programmers. They really count on
the compiler. You know, I
don't have a lot of
bugs or I know that
nothing horrible is going to
happen because the really, really
strict compiler told me it
was cool. Right, right. They
know that something horrible is
wrong before they run, because
the compiler catches it. But
VB like VB six people,
there were some dynamic language
aspects of VB six with
variants that you really didn't
know the behavior until you
actually run it. So they
moved the, the, that responsibility
out of the compiler a
bit. But where did that,
where did that go? Where
the responsibility go, they took
20% of the responsibility out
of the compiler. There weren't
a lot of unit tests.
I didn't want to use
a lot of unit tests
and VB six, did you
know, there wasn't even such
a thing. Really. Exactly. So
then by 20% of the
quote, unquote responsibility, this, this
theoretical responsibility there of, you
know, who's going to check
stuff, kind of fell on
the floor that got picked
up. We moved into the.net
world where we had really
strong compilers, but also some
dynamic aspects of things with
reflection and with late binding
that allowed us to do
things that could get us
in trouble. But we pick
that ball up with test
driven development. So now we
lean on the compiler halfway
and on the test. So
you're saying with tests, with
test driven development, or even
just you running in unit
for crying out loud, we
are, we, we can now
variants aren't evil anymore. Is
this what you're saying? Not
Well that that's, that's a
kind of a, that's a
good way to put it
to the, on an inflammatory
way to put it. But
you're, you're right. I'm trying
to eat up the, you
know, the no, You're right.
Because what I'm saying is
that dynamic languages are less
evil if you have a
parachute. Right? So our parachute
and C plus plus was
a really hardcore compiler that
wouldn't let us get away
with anything. And we had
less of a parachuting in
VB six, and this is
why you get object reference,
not set all the time
with old VB applications. Right.
This is the cause. What,
what does that really mean?
Right. What does an exception
mean? If you get an
unhandled exception in your application,
it means something happened that
you weren't ready for something
exceptional happens. Something you didn't
expect occurred. Now in a
dynamic language, I can write
a Rubia application. I can
hit save and no one's
going to do anything. No
one cares that I haven't,
that I have syntax errors
all through it. So it's
on me to then fill
it up with a better
testing. So what I'm saying
is that really awesome tests
within an interpreted dynamic environment
can actually take the place
of the compiler. They are
taking the place of the
compiler, because all that the
compiler does is it syntax
checks your intent, right. But
a test is a really
great way of expressing your
intent. Yeah. It goes beyond
the compiling stage. It actually
looks for results. Exactly. Yeah.
Then someone could really get
some real good work done.
If they had a language
that had a really great
compiler, but also a flexible
enough syntax that would let
them do the kinds of
things like active record that
one would want to do
in a performant way. And
then they could build tests
around it. And they have
the best of both worlds.
And I think that five
years from now, we're going
to see a very Ruby
ask C-sharp and a very
Ruby ask VB, as people
start to realize that small
talk has had these kinds
of features for 30 years,
and we've been off kind
of in the desert, in
our strongly typed hardcore compiler
languages. And we're going to
find a very dynamic middle
ground. That's going to involve
very few lines of code.
So what are some examples
of active record and or
rails in the, in the
Microsoft world? Well, Before you
answer that question, let me
ask this, which may be
on the listeners mind also,
what if you're not embracing
test driven development. Wow. Be
afraid. Let me, let me,
let me put it this
way. Not everybody does well
and you know, and everybody
should, this is the thing
I just, That's what I
mean. And I mean more
work for you. Well, Yeah,
Not for you, but you
know what I'm saying? That,
let me, let me give
you an example. I had
an intern this summer. I
wanted to actually get him
on the show, but it
didn't work out, but I
had an intern and he
just finished up yesterday. We
gave our presentation everybody, and
he worked on an asp.net
application that did some online
banking stuff. For some things
that I'm working on. I
can't talk about, this is
a 16 year old sophomore
in high school. Okay. Guys
never coded C-sharp before. He's
at a little bit of
Java in high school. He
did a little VB six
and he played with Ruby
once or twice. And in
30 working days put together
a nice clean online banking
site where someone could log
in and pay their bills.
And how did he accomplish
this? We use test driven
development. We used water, right?
The web application testing in
Ruby for all of our
tests. And we used test
driven development. He wrote 168
tests in water that would
just beat on this thing.
Most of it with negative
testing, because this is a
guy who has no computer
science background. He's a 16
year old kid. And he
just thought about, well, what
would someone evil do to
try to break my application?
So he had hundreds of
tests that would just put
in garbage in text boxes
and try to do, try
to transfer too much money
and just fight with this
application. He pounded on it
like only a 16 year
old could. And we ended
up with more code in
our tests than we did
in our application because the
goal was for the application
to do exactly what it
needed to do and know
more and allow only the
correct input. And when he
coded in this style, he
ended up with a lot
of work in the tests,
but then that test became
his parachute. We had to
go and do some refactoring.
After we gave the presentation,
he had a few hours
before the end of his,
his summer. And we had
a bunch of requirements. They
said, we need these things
changed. He's like, Oh man,
I don't want to change
this application. It's gonna, it's
gonna break everything. And I
said, no, it's not. You
got 168 tests. That'll prove
if anything is broken you'll
know immediately. And we were
right. And that sense of
confidence of, wow, I can
refactor this. We cut another
hundred lines out of the
application and the 168 tests
passing, where are our confidence
that this thing works? Not
just that it compiles cause
compiling just says the syntax
is right, but the intent,
the semantics, Well, Scott, that's
a very good argument why
people should, should use and
embrace test driven development. However,
there are those people that
won't simply because it's not
a requirement. It's not. Yeah.
It's actually, And they will
have buggy code and I
will. What's your other question
is will it be buggier
with a dynamic C-sharp and
a dynamic Phoebe? That's a
very good point then If
you, yeah, here's an example.
Let me give you, let
me say this. Let's say
I wrote some test scripts.
Okay. And I wrote them
to work on an application
and let's say that you're
going to write it in
an application that has only
object, totally dynamic, right? No
strongly typing. And then I'll
write it in C sharp
and our tests will run
against both applications. Yes. Right?
So the exact same test
will do the exact same
stuff to a browser. And
the app just happens to
be written in two different,
totally different languages, as long
as all a hundred and
some odd test pass, does
it really matter what language
it was written? Okay. Now
take away the tests. There
you go. Go. If the
tests weren't there, we can't
know. Right. So, so the
question is if you have
a dynamic language, that's set
up to allow this kind
of variant, you know, behavior.
Exactly. Yeah. That's does it,
does it put, does it
make it a liability not
to use test driven development?
I think it does. That's
a good point. So you
doing dynamic development, doing semi
doing development in a dynamic
language without a lot of
tests could potentially open you
up to a lot of
weird data, typing conversion type
of errors. That's why I
think that negative testing is
so, So then that brings
us to the other conclusion,
which is if you do
not, if there are more
people not doing test driven
development than doing test driven
development, they are not going
to move to the new
dynamic languages. And they going
to stay with the old
version of.net. That was too
many knots there. I got
confused somewhere in the trip.
There are other words. In
other words, let's say, let's
say 65% of the development
going on is non does
not use test driven development,
which it's even more than
that. Oh, I'm sure it's
lots. Right. So C sharp
three O comes out VB,
net 17, whatever it is,
comes out. And they're both
dynamic languages. Is that going
to keep people from upgrading
to the new version, possibly
of a new framework of
a new language? Good question.
I think that the beat
marches on right. Or whatever,
the things, things continue to
move forward. The issue is
that the, when you go
to a Microsoft presentation, every
three or four years, they
sit down with the Northwind
database, they drag a data
grid over and they say,
and look what I did
without writing a single line
of code, right. They've been
doing this for 15 years.
Right. We, every few years
we go and we see
the big data grid presentation,
right? Except this year, it
did. We, we drug the
data grid over and it
did Ajax. Okay. With things
like blink B L I
N Q at shrinker slash
H E G, which is
the closest thing to rails
on asp.net that Microsoft has
come out with, lets you
basically dynamically generate an entire
asp.net website for displaying creating
data, doing all crud type
data based on a database
schema without writing any code
at all. So there's not
even any dragging around. I
mean, they don't even go
into you. Don't going to
visual studio. You just say
do it. And it happens.
So I think when people
see that you, we could
go and rewrite the handsome
and it's ad man with
a tool like this blink
prototype by Polita Paulus. And
once people see that there's,
if they don't move, then
if they don't move forward,
then maybe that's not what
they wanted. Right. I mean,
Microsoft's trying to make products
to make life easier if
Microsoft doesn't do it, somebody
else will. And people to
see that. Ooh, I dunno.
I don't know if that's
a strong enough argument for
me, but we'll see. I
mean basically basically what it
means is that people are
being forced into test driven
development and will they go?
So it'll be interesting to
see. Well, let me ask
you this, then here's a
better argument where people forced
into using source control when
Microsoft started giving away visual
source safe, right before people,
people in the windows world
weren't using source control. Everyone
was using source control in
the Unix world, but Microsoft
people would just zip up
their files and say, well,
there you go. That's version
for today. I'll zip it
up and put it over
on a share. You know,
we're, we're people are gonna
use test driven development because
a it's free and B
it, it works. So you,
I think there will be
a competitive advantage to being
test driven. Yeah. You know
what, let me give you
an example. There's a shareware
developer who had some applications
that I installed. Cause you
know, if it hasn't, if
it exists, I've run it
and installed it on my
machine at least once. And
I went to, I had
some trouble with it. So
I emailed him and you
already said, it's amazing. He
says, go to the help
about I'm like, okay help
about, and he says, you
see a button there that
says run tests. He actually
ships his end unit tests.
And in the help about
menu hid an end unit
runner. So he actually shipped
him and I ran his
entire test suite on my
machine, which let him see
if the environment that I
was running on would pass
his test. And one of
the tests didn't pass. Cause
he had made an assumption
about a path, Nate, what
a brilliant way to do
production time developing to production
time debugging rather. Yeah. There's
no doubt about it. That
when you reach the end
of a life cycle of
an application built with test
driven development, you've got a
superior product. I guess the
people on the other side
of the camp and I'm
not taking a position either
way. I'm saying the people
on the other side of
the camp say, well, you
know, if you live in
a, in an ivory tower
world where, you know, there,
there's an infinite amount of
time and money to develop
great. But you know, for
the, for the rest of
the real world, people out
here, we're trying to build
apps as fast as we
can as most stable as
we possibly can. All right.
Well, let me give you
one more argument and then
we'll do a couple of
links and we'll move on.
Okay. So if you can
express the requirement, the business
requirement in a, in a
simple test, right, they requirement
is they must be able
to read a record, change
it and save it. And
you know, these conditions will
be met. You can say
that in English, you can,
or any language for that
matter. You can say it
in prose and write it
in a word document. But
I've, as I've said before,
a word document, hasn't had
any teeth, right? Word documents,
don't break, builds, exceptions, stop
applications, but word documents don't
actually do anything. But if
I can write a test
in a very simple, straightforward
way that says, this is
my intent, right? We spent
so much time writing code
to our intent, but we're
expressing that intent to the
computer, right? But will the,
computer's not the, the customer
here. The customer is whoever
is hired me to write
this application. So my, my
tests are the best description
in computer language of what
that person's intent are. So
if you look at test
driven development, as a way
of translating that person's intent
into something, the computer understands.
And then also proving that
the requirement is met. You
can look at all of
those green bars that light
up in end unit telling
you that your application works
well as Jew, as basically
saying my requirement was met
for this application. And if
you look at it that
way, you'll spend less time
writing specs because specs aren't
useful, right? Specs can't test
my application, but test scan.
So that might be a
better argument. Okay. One of
the, one of the things
I wanted to mention was
that we were talking about
Ray, what it was like
to have rails and or
active record on, on windows,
right? There's something worth checking
out called the castle project.
You can take a look
at shrink, stir.com/h E N
and a Castle's a set
of tools that you can
work, work with them together.
Or you can use them
independently that lets you integrate
better your applications. And the
really interesting ones are monorail.
Monorail is basically a, they
used to call it castle
on rails, but it's basically
rails for asp.net. It's a
different style. It's more of
a model view controller where
they call MVC or action
pack way of doing things.
There's an interesting explanation about
how it works, why you
might want to do it.
Why would it be useful
if you like rails might
check that out. But the
most interesting thing I think
is a layer that sits
on top of an hibernate,
right? And hibernate is the,
the object relational mapper that
lets you take objects and
map them with XML relationship
files into the database. This
is a version of active
record and the active record
pattern for.net. It's built on
top of an hibernate, but
it, it frees you of
all of that XML TD
tediousness. Alright, so a couple
more, we got time for
a couple more links. Sure.
Yeah. If you want to
check out blink, which is
B L I N Q
blink a there's a really
good tutorial at ARS Technica
at shrinker slash H E
J and then FTP online
is a great tutorial from
last last month before last
on how to use blink
it's shrinks there slash H
E K. And again, you
can download blink at shrinks
or slash H E G
and then D do check
out the castle project. It's
a really interesting way to
think about things it's different
from asp.net. It's not, not
how you're used to doing
web applications. And that might
be a good thing. It
shrinked or slash H E
N hen. Excellent. Well, Scott,
it sounds like you got
to go there. I ends
up crying in the background,
so we'll let you go
think I've got a poopy
baby on my hands. I
got a jet and we'll
see you next week on
.